# Who are the players?

**Robert J. Aumann**  
*December 15, 2025*

---

## 1. Collectives as players

In applications of game theory, a “player” may be a person; household (or family); sports team; country; political party; community; corporation; labor union; species or other population; and so on. Usually, this is understood as an idealization, a kind of “small worlds” principle[^1]. In games where, say, countries are modeled as players, the “real” players are the individual citizens, with their individual goals and individual decisions and individual free will. It’s only because this “true” game is too big and unwieldy to analyze that, it is held, game theorists model players as they do.

Here, we will explore the idea that this is not an idealization; that in large part, collectives are like individual people, and may be thought of as such. And, perhaps, not only in game theory.

To start with, individuals and collectives are quite similar in form; in mathematical parlance, they are roughly isomorphic. Individuals are composed of cells; similarly, collectives are composed of people. The cells comprising an individual are grouped in organs, limbs, muscles, blood vessels, and other entities, which are interdependent; similarly, the people comprising a collective are grouped in social, geographic, political, economic, educational and other entities, which are interdependent. Individuals change over time, in particular age and die; so do collectives.

Individuals have diseases and internal mechanisms to fight them; similarly, collectives suffer from problems such as crime and pollution, which are kept under control by police, regulatory bodies, and so on. Individuals have relationships–friendly or hostile–with other individuals; similarly, collectives cooperate with each other, compete, make alliances, fight wars, engage in trade, erect trade barriers. Individuals decide, consciously or otherwise; similarly, collectives decide, centrally or otherwise.

So the “player,” for the purposes of game-theoretic analysis, may well be the collective. We propose that it indeed is. Individual “will” is largely shaped by communication and incentives, and so by the collectives to which we belong. Thus, career choices are heavily influenced by the family: The children of musicians often become musicians; of physicians, physicians; of lawyers, lawyers; of Rabbis, Rabbis; even of mathematicians, mathematicians. (Not to speak of family businesses, in which the children regularly work, and which they eventually take over.)

In times of war, almost everyone sides with his country[^2]; in battle, soldiers on opposing sides willingly risk their lives, even knowingly sacrifice them. Terrorists happily commit suicide for their cause, as on 9/11. During the Renaissance, rather than renouncing the faiths of their communities, Protestants were burned at the stake in Catholic countries, Catholics in Protestant countries, and Jews in both. Seventy years ago, homosexuality was in the west frowned upon (in the east it still is); today, it is a source of pride[^3]. In the Antebellum South, slavery was considered perfectly OK[^4]; in the North, it was abhorred. In the thirties, forties and even fifties of the last century, many good people[^5] worshipped Josef Stalin, with full knowledge of what he was doing; today he is considered an unspeakable monster. In some hospitals, it is comme il faut for the staff to be pleasant to patients and visitors; in others, efficiency and a sour puss are the order of the day. If everybody stops for pedestrians at pedestrian crossings, so do you; if nobody does, you don’t either. If everybody picks wildflowers, so do you; if nobody does, you don’t either. And so on.

These are not the results of independent decision-making. They result from the collective spirit–the “Zeitgeist”[^6]. If you grew up in a house filled with music, you naturally got to love it. If your mother[^7] was a successful lawyer, you met lawyers and heard about them, celebrated with her when she won cases, looked up to her, sought to emulate her; law seeped into your being. If you owned a plantation in the Antebellum South, the thing to do was own slaves, and that’s what you did; the whole system–economic, social, religious— was set up that way. You admired Stalin because everyone in your peer group did; somehow, you swallowed whole the pitiful explanations of his unspeakable atrocities[^8].

To be sure, it also happens that individuals significantly influence collectives. For example, religious, political, philosophical, scientific or artistic innovators like Abraham, Jesus, Mohammed, Marx, Herzl, Voltaire, Socrates, Galileo, Wheeler[^9], Stravinsky, Van Gogh. Even there, the ideas and actions of these individuals no doubt arose from their surroundings. More important, the significance of these and other influential individuals resides–tautologically–in their influence on collectives, or in the creation of new collectives. So after all, it is the collective that emerges as the player; the individual is but a single “neuron” that “fires” the process.

---

## 2. Personification in science

### 2.1. Biology

There is a school of thought in entomology that considers the “individual” or “organism” in social insects (bees, ants, termites, wasps) to be the colony (nest or hive)–not the particular worker, soldier, or queen. It was pioneered by William M. Wheeler, who 110 years ago delivered a lecture entitled “The ant-colony as an organism”[^10] at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole. From there, the idea took off.

To cite just a tiny–and somewhat haphazard–selection of the enormous literature: Clements[^11] compares the succession of plant species that culminates in a forest to the growth and development of a single organism. Odum[^12] compares ecosystem processes such as nutrient cycling to the physiological processes of individuals. Margulis[^13] suggests that eucaryotic cells are in fact tightly integrated communities of bacteria. Wynne-Edwards[^14] proposes that populations evolve to avoid extinction, just as individuals evolve to avoid their own deaths[^15]. Aumann and Gueth[^16] account for the high degree of cooperative and even altruistic behavior in much of the animal kingdom by species selection. Wilson[^17] describes the evolution of eusocial colonies, in which the offspring of a reproductive caste are cared for across generations by nonreproductive worker and soldier castes; eusociality occurs not only in social insects, but also in crustacea[^18] and even mammals[^19]. Gordon[^20] shows that insect colonies, flocks of flying birds, and many other collectives resemble individuals, in that they operate without central control[^21].

Much of this literature concerns the evolutionary process, holding that selection may and often does operate on collectives such as hives and even species[^22]. Here we are primarily concerned not with the unit of selection but with the unit of action–i.e., the player. Though related, the two are different.

### 2.2. Strategic game theory

Recall that a Nash equilibrium[^24] of a strategic[^23] (aka normal form) game is a profile of (possibly mixed) strategies, one for each player, each of which is best possible for that player, given the strategies of the other players. In the first instance, this applies to ordinary games played between individuals. But there is also a different interpretation. Under appropriate assumptions, the same equations that describe Nash equilibria in games also describe equilibria of interacting populations (like bees interacting with flowers); i.e., situations where the proportion of each genotype in each of the interacting populations remains constant over successive generations[^25]. Here the populations and their genotypes in the ecological context correspond, respectively, to the players and their pure strategies in the game context.

So here, too, the “player” appears as a collective–indeed an entire population. This resembles the Wynne-Edwards perspective mentioned in the previous section; but in most of the literature adduced there–social insects, eucaryotic cells, altruistic behavior–the collective is not only structurally analogous to a player, but has a functional, operative role. Again, in this paper we wish primarily to cast the collective as the decision maker, the doer.

Closely related to the above–and chronologically preceding it–is the concept of evolutionarily stable strategy[^26], a variant of Nash equilibrium.

### 2.3. Coalitional game theory

In coalitional[^27] game theory, consider an exchange economy with several sectors, each consisting of many small traders having the same endowments and preferences. Assume that each commodity is initially held by just one sector. S. Hart[^28] has shown that then each symmetric stable set[^29] of the large economy corresponds to a stable set of a small economy: that in which each sector is a single trader. That is, the traders in each sector form a coalition that bargains with the others as a single unit, then divides the proceeds from the bargaining equally among the traders in that sector.

That’s far from obvious. For a simple example, suppose there are two sectors and two goods, and that all traders have the same symmetric[^30] strictly quasiconcave preferences. Then there is just one competitive outcome, in which all traders divide both goods equally. According to received economic theory, competitive pressures necessarily bring this outcome about; any other is dominated, via a coalition recruited from both sectors.

The stable set, however, differs. By Hart’s theorem, it is as if there were just two traders. And with two traders, there is only one stable set, consisting of all the outcomes that are Pareto optimal and yield each trader at least the preference level of his initial bundle. In our case, this constitutes an interval in 4-space (two dimensions for each trader). The competitive outcome is in this interval, indeed in its middle; but the interval contains also other outcomes, some better for one trader, some for the other. Which of these outcomes will obtain is a matter to be settled by bargaining between the traders.

Unlike disciplines such as economics, political science, or international relations, game theory does not use different, ad hoc constructs to analyze various kinds of specific situation (perfect competition, monopoly, taxation, voting, ...). Rather, it develops methodologies that apply to all interactive situations, then sees where they lead in specific contexts. There is nothing in the definition of stable set that would lead one to expect that it will predict the formation of collectives that resemble individuals; the notion springs by itself from the analysis.

---

## 3. Personification in scripture

### 3.1. The Red Sea

In the book of Exodus, after allowing the children of Israel to leave Egypt, Pharaoh changes his mind, mobilizes his forces, and pursues them, catching up with them as they are encamped at the Red Sea. And “the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and behold, Egypt is advancing after them” (Exodus 14, 10)[^31]. The eleventh century commentator Rashi, noting that the phrase “Egypt is advancing” has the singular form, explains that the Egyptians were “of one mind, like one man” in pursuing the children of Israel.

### 3.2. Sinai

Later, when the children of Israel arrive at Mount Sinai, the bible says “Israel encamped there opposite the mountain” (Exodus 20, 2). In English, the word “encamped” may be either singular or plural. But Hebrew distinguishes between the two; here the original has the singular form[^32]. Again, Rashi explains that the children of Israel were “like one man, of one mind” at Mount Sinai.

---

## 4. Twin sisters

This 2002 Dutch film[^33] tells the story of German identical twin sisters whose parents are killed in an automobile accident in the twenties of the last century, when they are six years old. There ensues a bitter legal battle between Dutch and German relatives for custody of the children. In the end, the court splits the twins between the two families, in spite of the ultra-close relationship that is known to obtain between identical twins.

The twins grow up with their respective adoptive families; they try to stay in touch, but the German family does not deliver the letters that the Dutch twin Lotte sends to her sister Anna. In Germany, the Nazis come into power; nationalism and rabid anti-semitism sweep the country. Anna falls in love with a neighborhood boy; they hold long, serious conversations, the boy earnestly explaining how Hitler is saving the country. In the meantime, Lotte falls in love with a Jewish boy, a family acquaintance.

The war starts. Germany overpowers the Netherlands. Anna marries her sweetheart, who volunteers for the SS. Lotte’s sweetheart is deported, never to be heard from again. Anna’s husband, who drives a personnel carrier on the Russian front, is killed when a shell hits the parked vehicle, while his passengers are off on a combat mission.

After the war, the twins find each other, and Anna comes to visit Lotte for a few days. On the second day, Lotte sees on the dresser in Anna’s room a framed picture of an SS officer in dress uniform, and asks Anna who that is. Sad but proud, Anna answers “my late husband.” Lotte throws her out of the house.

Half a century passes. The twins, now well into their seventies, accidentally meet at a Swiss spa; but the spark does not return.

End.

This is fiction. But like Koestler’s “Darkness at Noon,” it gets straight to the heart of the matter, perhaps more starkly than any non-fictional account possibly could[^34]. Though Lotte’s and Anna’s initial conditions are identical, each is swept up by her surroundings, becomes part and parcel of them. When Lotte throws Anna out, she is expressing her disgust with the collective: Nazi Germany. And, with the individual: Anna, who has inevitably become an integral part of that collective.

---

## 5. A personal experience

On March 12, 1938, Germany annexed a willing Austria, a move forbidden by the Versailles treaty. The German people were asked to approve in a plebiscite. Though Jews were persecuted, they were still citizens, and had the right to vote. The rabbi of the orthodox Jewish community in my home town Frankfurt voted “no,” and was forthwith arrested[^35]. The Jewish community was aghast.

My brother was 11 years old, and I was going on 8. Everybody around us was talking about the arrest, and so were we children. But whereas our elders considered it an outrage, my brother and I agreed that it was perfectly justified; the rabbi “had it coming” to him. Not because it was reckless in those circumstances to vote “no,” but because it was morally wrong; the “right” vote was “yes,” and anybody who voted differently deserved punishment.

We were Jewish, belonged to a persecuted, hated minority, were beaten up by young Nazi hoodlums on the way to school. Nevertheless, the street, the public sphere— the collective— engulfed even us.

---

## 6. Ethics

Finally, with trepidation, we move to the moral, ethical implications of this perspective.

Is the individual morally responsible for the collective’s actions? As he[^36] is not the player— the doer— why should he be? But if no individual is responsible, in what practical way can the collective be held accountable?

We’re not sure of our ground here. On its face, it seems that indeed, the individual should not be held responsible for the collective’s actions. But the collective itself should be.

The collective consists of individuals. What happens to the collective, happens to the individuals constituting it. It is exactly as we said above: When Lotte throws Anna out, she is expressing disgust with the collective— Nazi Germany. And, with the individual— Anna— who has inevitably become an integral part of that collective.

People occasionally fight. When the violence is physical, as in a fist fight, physical damage may well ensue. A black eye, broken teeth, bruises. Admittedly, eyes play an essential role in a fight, so the black eye is well justified. But can the broken tooth be justified? Teeth are non-combatants in a fist fight, so perhaps care should be taken not to damage them. The chest and the cheeks also play no role in the fight; should care be taken to avoid bruising them?

Obviously, the question is absurd. The fight is between the people, not between the fists. Each person wants to overpower the other, not just the fists of the other.

Can we conclude that similarly, collateral damage to non-combatants in a struggle between collectives need not be avoided?

Well, something in that direction may indeed be justified. But care must be exercised. Fists are not people; they have no independent existence of their own. Collectives consist of people, who do exist on their own, though not independently.

---

## Footnotes

[^1]: See L J Savage (1954), *The foundations of statistics*, New York: John Wiley. In discussing one-person decision making, he writes that in principle, “one should envisage every conceivable policy for the government of his whole life in its most minute details, and decide here and now on one policy. This is utterly ridiculous ...”(p. 16). He goes on to discuss the small worlds doctrine, “the practical necessity of confining attention to, or isolating, relatively simple situations ...”(p. 82).
[^2]: “Both (sides) read the same Bible and pray to the same God, and each invokes His aid against the other.” (Abraham Lincoln’s second inaugural address, delivered toward the end of the American civil war.)
[^3]: But incest, even between consenting adults, is still a no-no.
[^4]: Thomas Jefferson, the author of America’s Declaration of Independence, held slaves.
[^5]: Like Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, Americans who were executed in 1953 for providing top-secret information about nuclear weapon design to the Soviet Union.
[^6]: Literally, the spirit of the times.
[^7]: pc–yet another instance of the collective spirit.
[^8]: Even his victims became convinced that they needed to be executed. See Arthur Koestler, *Darkness at Noon*, 1940; though fictional, the novel closely reflects historical reality.
[^9]: See “Biology” below.
[^10]: Published in *Morphology* 22, 1911, pp. 307-325. See also his 1927 book *Emergent evolution and the social*, London: Kegan Paul.
[^11]: “Plant Succession: An Analysis of the Development of Vegetation,” *Publs. Carnegie Instn.* 242 (1916), 1-512.
[^12]: “The strategy of ecosystem development,” *Science*, N.Y. 164 (1969), 262-70.
[^13]: *Origin of Eukaryotic cells*, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1970.
[^14]: *Evolution through group selection*. Oxford: Blackwell, 1986.
[^15]: The previous four sentences are quoted, with minor changes, from DS Wilson and E Sober (1989), “Reviving the Superorganism,” *J Theor Biol* 136, 337-356.
[^16]: “Species Survival and Evolutionary Stability in Sustainable Habitats,” *J Evol Econ* 10 (2000), 437-447.
[^17]: “One Giant Leap: How Insects Achieved Altruism and Colonial Life,” *BioScience* 58 (2008), 17–25.
[^18]: *Synalpheus regalis*, a snapping shrimp living in the coral reefs of the tropical West Atlantic.
[^19]: The East African naked mole rat.
[^20]: “The collective wisdom of ants,” *Scientific American*, February 2016, 44-47.
[^21]: One might object that individuals are centrally controlled by their brains. But that is only very partially true; most body systems have little or nothing to do with the brain. Moreover, Gordon points out that the brain itself is a collective–a network of neurons–with no central control.
[^22]: A subject that is hotly debated in evolutionary biology (see, for example, Richard Dawkins, *The selfish gene*, Oxford University Press, 1976). Opponents account for eusociality in social insects by kin selection and the unusual haplodiploid genetics of the hive, which “makes workers very closely related to the queen” (Wikipedia); but that does not explain why *Synalpheus regalis* and the naked mole rat, who have perfectly standard genetics, are eusocial. Moreover, mole rat queens tend to mate with non-kin males, as inbreeding leads–like with humans–to the expression of recessive deleterious alleles, further weakening the case for kin selection (D Charlesworth and JH Willis, 2009, “The genetics of inbreeding depression”, *Nature Reviews Genetics* 10, 783–96).
[^23]: aka noncooperative.
[^24]: JF Nash (1951), “Non-cooperative games,” *Annals of Mathematics* 54, 289-295.
[^25]: See the entry on Game Theory in *The New Palgrave, A Dictionary of Economics*, Vol 2, Macmillan, London and Basingstoke, 1987, pp. 460-482; specifically, item i of 1970-1986.
[^26]: J Maynard Smith and GR Price (1973), “The logic of animal conflict,” *Nature* 246: 15–18.
[^27]: aka cooperative.
[^28]: “Formation of cartels in large markets," *J. Econ. Theory* 7 (1974), 453-466.
[^29]: A set K of outcomes of a game or economy is called stable if it is the set of all outcomes not dominated by outcomes in K: See J von Neumann and O Morgenstern (1944), *Theory of Games and Economic Behavior*, Princeton: Princeton University Press. “Symmetric” means that traders in the same sector are treated in the same way.
[^30]: $(x, y) \sim (y, x)$
[^31]: Inaccurately, most translations have something like “the Egyptians were advancing,” using the plural form.
[^32]: Unlike, say, I Samuel 29, 1: “And Israel are encamped ... .”
[^33]: Based on the novel *The twins* by Tessa de Loo.
[^34]: Much as Audubon’s bird drawings are more accurate than any photograph.
[^35]: One might ask how the Germans knew how he voted. Well, in Nazi Germany that was no problem.
[^36]: The gentle reader will forgive us for this gaffe. Relic of a previous generation that used masculine pronouns for indeterminate as well as masculine gender, we cannot get ourselves to abandon this usage without feeling awkward and artificial.
